This archive contains the {tlhIngan Hol mu'ghom mach} - a pocket
sized Klingon-English, English-Klingon dictionary.

It is my intention that the dictionary should be printed and stapled
to form a book (more detailed instructions below), but of course you
may use it in whatever way you wish, as long as you give me credit
for the work I've done.

There is a small pronunciation guide in the preface of the
dictionary, as well as explanations to all abbreviations and sources
used.

On the final page of the dictionary (the back cover) there is a verb
prefix chart. - This chart probably looks a bit different from what
you're used to, but it is my belief that you (like me) soon wouldn't
like to have it any other way.

The "subject" and "object" headlines have been rearranged to better
reflect the Klingon word order, and instead of the usual "first,
second, third person singular; first, second, third person plural"
arrangement we have mixed the plurals and singulars together so that
all first persons (both singular and plural) are next to each other.
This makes all identical prefixes come in adjacent cells (the only
exception is {yI-}) and makes possible to look up a Klingon prefix
*much* quicker, since you don't have to search the whole table again
and again for alternate meanings.

This archive consists of two postscript files; the cover, and the
main text. You will probably want to print the cover on a thicker
paper, since this will make your copy of the dictionary more
resistant to everyday wear.


Assembly Instructions:

  o Print the main dictionary (main-a6.ps) on ordinary printer
    paper, using a printer that prints on both sides of the paper.

  o Print the cover (cover-a6.ps) on a thicker paper. (You will get
    two copies of the cover, on a single sheet of paper. You may
    want to use one to practise reinforcing the cover, or you may
    just want to throw it away - your choice.)

  o Carefully and neatly cut all the papers in half, from long side
    to longside. (A sharp knife and a metal ruler helps a lot!)

  o You should now have the main text in two separate piles. (And
    two cover sheets.) Ignoring the cover sheets, put the piles on
    top of each other, and check that you got the page numbers
    right. (The piles themselves are correctly sorted, so it's just
    a matter of which pile should be on top of the other.)

  o To increase the life expectancy of your book, you may want to
    reinforce the cover. (The back of the book is the part that
    wears the most.) One way to do this is to put a stripe of duct
    tape directly across the page, on the part that will become the
    back of the book. (This tape will assure that the stapels that
    hold the book together won't wear through the cover.) Another
    way of reinforcing the cover is to wrap it in self­adhesive
    (transparent) plastic. I use both these methods.

  o Put your reinforced cover in the same pile as the main text
    (once again carefully checking that it is in the right place,
    and not in the middle of the book.

  o Align the pages (and make sure that the pages stay aligned while
    stapling).

  o Use a stapler to staple through the entire pile down the middle
    of it. (You probably need a larger than standard stapler, since
    the pile consists of somewhere between 30 and 50 sheets - also I
    have problems in getting a standard stapler to reach the middle
    of the page.)

  o At last, fold the pages into a book. (The pages may sprawl a
    bit, to help fix this you can put a pencil inside the book and
    then press to fold from the outside. The sprawling will
    otherwise decrease over time as you carry it around in your
    pocket.)

This is actually easier than it sounds, and don't give up if you
don't succed the first time. Also even if you happen to staple the
book a bit crooked, that usually gets better when you wear it a bit.

Hopefully, in the future I will be able to enclose an illustrated
version of this instruction in this archive. But until then I feel
that this is better than nothing.

Zrajm C Akfohg, president of Klingonska Akademien
27 August 2000, Uppsala, Sweden
